---
title: 'Introduction to cybersecurity'
description: ''
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '22/09/2023'
tags: 'cybersecurity, introduction'
sources: [
    {
label: coursera cybersecurity professional,
    to: 'https://www.coursera.org/learn/foundations-of-cybersecurity?specialization=google-cybersecurity'
}
]
---

## Responsibilities of an entry-level cybersecurity analyst

With the rapid evolution of digitization, attackers are engineering more sophisticated tactics, techniques and procedures to compromise security and hence security professionals are required to constantly update their skills to better protect sensitive data and assets.

Security analysts are generally responsible for  monitoring, and protecting information systems. Their primary responsibilities are:

- Protecting computer and network systems
- Installing prevention softwares
- Conducting periodic audits

## The eight CISSP Security domains

The eight :cy-definition{src="abbreviation/cissp" label="CISSP"} security domains are as follows

1. Security and Risk Management: It focuses on CIA of information, security governance principles, legal and regulatory compliance requirements and issues, security policies defining goals, incidence response and disaster recovery, etc. Example if a change is made in GDPR, security analysts may need to investigate how it affects the company and advice executives of the company what needs to be done to achieve compliance and what changes should be made to the company policies.
2. Asset Security: This domain focuses on securing digital and physical assets. It is also related to the storage, maintenance, retention and destruction of information/data cycle. Example is a security analysts may need to ensure backups of information, ensure data in physical or digital forms are properly dispose or destroyed to prevent illegal exposure of sensitive data.
3. Security Architecture and engineering: This domain focuses on optimizing data security by ensuring effective tools, systems, and processes are in place. As a security analyst you may need to configure a :cy-definition{src="/networking/Firewall" label="firewall"}.
4. Communications and Network Security: This domain focuses on secure design principles for network architecture, secure network components, and secure communication channels. As a security analysts you may need to create policies to prevent unknown unauthorized devices from connecting to companies private network.
5. Identity and Access Management: This domain focuses on ensuring authorized physical and/or logical access to assets, proper identification and authentication methods such as multi-factor authentication and proper authorization mechanisms which prevents improper exposure of data to unauthorized individuals.
6. Security Assessment and Testing: This domain covers designing and validating assessment and testing strategies; security control testing; collecting security process data; test outputs; and performing both internal and external security audits.
7. Security Operations: This domain covers logging and monitoring activities; incident management; disaster recovery; business continuity;
8. Software Development Security: This domain focuses secure coding practices, security in application development cycle; security controls in development and production environments.
