---
title: 'Ethics in cybersecurity'
description: ''
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '25/09/2023'
tags: 'ethics'
sources: [
    {
label: 'Google cybersecurity',
    to: 'https://www.coursera.org/learn/foundations-of-cybersecurity?specialization=google-cybersecurity'
}
]
---



## Introduction

As technology evolves, new challenges presents itself. Maneuvering a security incident or risk is not always black and white. Imagine as an entry level cybersecurity analysts, you receive an alert of an incident and upon investigation, you discovered your supervisor/mentor(close relation) has made unauthorized data transfer. What do you do?

Ethically, as a security professional, your job is to remain unbiased and maintain security and confidentiality.
Whiles it's normal to want to protect a colleague/senior, regardless of who the user in question may be, your responsibility and obligation is to follow company's policies and protocols in handling the incident.

### Definition

Security ethics are guidelines for making appropriate decisions as a security professional.

## Scenarios and Ethical Principles (Confidentiality, Privacy Protection and Laws)

1. Assuming as a security analyst, you have the permission to grant yourself reading and writing privileges to payroll data. Does it mean you should give yourself a raise? Certainly, **No!**. You should never abuse the permissions granted to you to perform your responsibilities.
2. Confidentiality as applied to ethics means to safeguard data/assets without unauthorized exposure and/or access under any circumstance as dictated by organization policies, procedures and government laws. **For example**, you may want to help out a coworker by providing computer system access outside of properly documented channels. However, this ethical violation can result in serious consequences, including reprimands, the loss of your professional reputation, and legal repercussions for both you and your friend.
3. Let's consider privacy protection. Privacy protection means safeguarding personal information from unauthorized use. For example, imagine you receive a personal email after hours from your manager requesting a colleague's home phone number. Your manager explains that they can't access the employee database at the moment, but they need to discuss an urgent matter with that person. As a security analyst, your role is to follow the policies and procedures of your company, which in this example, state that employee information is stored in a secure database and should never be accessed or shared in any other format. So, accessing and sharing the employee's personal information would be unethical. In situations like this, it can be difficult to know what to do. So, the best response is to adhere to the policies and procedures set by your organization.
4. Finally, the law. Laws are rules that are recognized by a community and enforced by a governing entity. **For example**, consider a staff member at a hospital who has been trained to handle PII, and SPII for compliance. The staff member has files with confidential data that should never be left unsupervised, but the staff member is late for a meeting. Instead of locking the files in a designated area, the files are left on the staff member's desk, unsupervised. Upon the employee's return, the files are missing. The staff member has just violated multiple compliance regulations, and their actions were unethical and illegal, since their negligence has likely resulted in the loss of private patient and hospital data.
As a security professional, you have obligation to protect your organization, its internal infrastructure, and all stakeholders Hence,
    - You must remain unbiased and conduct your work honestly,, responsibly,and with the highest respect for the law.
    - Be transparent and just rely on evidence.
    - Ensure that you are consistently invested in the work you are doing, so you can appropriately and ethically address issues that arise.
    - Stay informed and strive to advance your skills, so you can contribute to the betterment of the cyber landscape

## Ethical concerns and laws related to counterattacks

We are certain that threat actors will come either today or tomorrow. Fact is sooner or later we will have to face them. The question is should we just be on the defense without attacking? I believe that there is a saying that "attack is the best defense" but is it lawful? What are the implications and laws governing **counter-attacking**?

### United States standpoint on counterattacks

In the U.S., deploying a counterattack on a threat actor is illegal because of laws like the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015, among others. You can only defend. The act of counterattacking in the U.S. is perceived as an act of vigilantism. A vigilante is a person who is not a member of law enforcement who decides to stop a crime on their own. And because threat actors are criminals, counterattacks can lead to further escalation of the attack, which can cause even more damage and harm. Lastly, if the threat actor in question is a state-sponsored hacktivist, a counterattack can lead to serious international implications. A hacktivist is a person who uses hacking to achieve a political goal. The political goal may be to promote social change or civil disobedience.
For these reasons, the only individuals in the U.S. who are allowed to counterattack are approved employees of the federal government or military personnel.

### International standpoint on counterattacks

The International Court of Justice (ICJ), which updates its guidance regularly, states that a person or group can counterattack if:

- The counterattack will only affect the party that attacked first.
- The counterattack is a direct communication asking the initial attacker to stop.
- The counterattack does not escalate the situation.
- The counterattack effects can be reversed.

Organizations typically do not counterattack because the above scenarios and parameters are hard to measure. There is a lot of uncertainty dictating what is and is not lawful, and at times negative outcomes are very difficult to control. Counterattack actions generally lead to a worse outcome, especially when you are not an experienced professional in the field.

## Key takeaways

As a future security professional, ethics will play a large role in your daily work. Understanding ethics and laws will help you make the correct choices if and when you encounter a security threat or an incident that results in a breach.
