---
title: 'Important Cybersecurity tools'
description: 'We'll learn SIEM tools and be introduced to programming langueges such as python and SQL'
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '26/09/2023'
tags: 'python, sql, SIEM, cybersecurity tools, splunk, chronicles, packet analyzer, playbooks'
sources: [
    {
label: 'Google cybersecurity',
    to: 'https://www.coursera.org/learn/foundations-of-cybersecurity/home/week/4'
}
]
---

## Introduction

We are going to learn cybersecurity tools such as SIEM(Security Information and Event Management) tools, programming languages such as SQL and python that is essential in the daily activities of cybersecurity professional, playbooks and  network protocol analyzers.

## SIEM

A SIEM tool is an application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization. A log is a record of events that occur within an organization’s systems. Imagine you are a security analyst for a medium-sized corporation with various departments and it is your responsibility to monitor all activities on the network. I mean there could be dozens of small networks(LAN, VLAN) connected together, this means it can take days or hours to go through all the logs and effectively identify incidents. Note that this is just one of many responsibilities as a security analyst or SOC, and that is why SIEM tools are important and needed in the arsenal of a security professional.
We have **cloud and on-premise** based SIEM tools depending on team member's expertise.

## Network protocol analyzers (packet sniffers)

A network protocol analyzer, also known as a packet sniffer, is a tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic in a network. This means that the tool keeps a record of all the data that a computer within an organization's network encounters.

## Playbooks

A playbook is a manual that provides details about any operational action, such as how to respond to a security incident. Organizations usually have multiple playbooks documenting processes and procedures for their teams to follow.

### Scenario

You are working as a security analyst for an incident response firm. You are given a case involving a small medical practice that has suffered a security breach. Your job is to help with the forensic investigation and provide evidence to a cybersecurity insurance company. They will then use your investigative findings to determine whether the medical practice will receive their insurance payout.

#### Scenario Lesson

In this scenario, playbooks would outline the specific actions you need to take to conduct the investigation. Playbooks also help ensure that you are following proper protocols and procedures. When working on a forensic case, there are two playbooks you might follow

- The first type of playbook you might consult is called the chain of custody playbook. Chain of custody is the process of documenting evidence possession and control during an incident lifecycle. As a security analyst involved in a forensic analysis, you will work with the computer data that was breached. You and the forensic team will also need to document who, what, where, and why you have the collected evidence. The evidence is your responsibility while it is in your possession. Evidence must be kept safe and tracked. Every time evidence is moved, it should be reported. This allows all parties involved to know exactly where the evidence is at all times.

- The second playbook your team might use is called the protecting and preserving evidence playbook. Protecting and preserving evidence is the process of properly working with fragile and volatile digital evidence. As a security analyst, understanding what fragile and volatile digital evidence is, along with why there is a procedure, is critical. As you follow this playbook, you will consult the order of volatility, which is a sequence outlining the order of data that must be preserved from first to last. It prioritizes volatile data, which is data that may be lost if the device in question powers off, regardless of the reason. While conducting an investigation, improper management of digital evidence can compromise and alter that evidence. When evidence is improperly managed during an investigation, it can no longer be used. For this reason, the first priority in any investigation is to properly preserve the data. You can preserve the data by making copies and conducting your investigation using those copies.

## Resources for more information

The Google Cybersecurity Action Team's [Threat Horizon Report](https://services.google.com/fh/files/blogs/gcat_threathorizons_full_sept2022.pdf)
 provides strategic intelligence for dealing with threats to cloud enterprise.

The Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) has a list of [Free Cybersecurity Services and Tools](https://www.cisa.gov/free-cybersecurity-services-and-tools). Review the list to learn more about open-source cybersecurity tools.

## Programming Languages

In simple terms, programming is giving the computer a set of instructions to perform a task. For example, you want to know the expected total cost of a shopping list and then you give tell the computer to first get all the prices on the list and add them up and maybe probably format the output nicely for you.
Security analysts use programming languages, such as **python** to harness the power of computers to automate common repetitive tasks.

Another useful programming language is Structured Query Language (SQL), it is used to create, interact with and query information from a :cy-definition{src="/foundation/database" label="database"} .

## General Knowledge

Below are important fundamental knowledge you need.

### Operating Systems

An operating system is the interface between computer hardware and the user. Linux®, macOS®, and Windows are operating systems. They each offer different functionality and user experiences.
**Linux** as an open-source operating system. Open source means that the code is available to the public and allows people to make contributions to improve the software. Linux is not a programming language; however, it does involve the use of a command line within the operating system. A command is an instruction telling the computer to do something. A command-line interface is a text-based user interface that uses commands to interact with the computer. You will learn more about Linux, including the Linux kernel and GNU, in a later course.

### Web vulnerability

A web vulnerability is a flaw in a web application that a threat actor could exploit by using malicious code or behavior, to allow unauthorized access, data theft, and malware deployment.

To stay up-to-date on the most critical risks to web applications, review the
[Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) Top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/).

### Antivirus software

Antivirus software is a software program used to prevent, detect, and eliminate malware and viruses. It is also called anti-malware. Depending on the type of antivirus software, it can scan the memory of a device to find patterns that indicate the presence of malware.

### Intrusion detection system

An intrusion detection system (IDS) is an application that monitors system activity and alerts on possible intrusions. The system scans and analyzes network packets, which carry small amounts of data through a network. The small amount of data makes the detection process easier for an IDS to identify potential threats to sensitive data. Other occurrences an IDS might detect can include theft and unauthorized access.

### Encryption

Encryption makes data unreadable and difficult to decode for an unauthorized user; its main goal is to ensure confidentiality of private data. Encryption is the process of converting data from a readable format to a cryptographically encoded format. Cryptographic encoding means converting plaintext into secure ciphertext. Plaintext is unencrypted information and secure ciphertext is the result of encryption.  

Note: Encoding and encryption serve different purposes. Encoding uses a public conversion algorithm to enable systems that use different data representations to share information

### Penetration testing

Penetration testing, also called pen testing, is the act of participating in a simulated attack that helps identify vulnerabilities in systems, networks, websites, applications, and processes. It is a thorough risk assessment that can evaluate and identify external and internal threats as well as weaknesses.
