---
title: "System Identification"
description: "This course covers firewalls, VPNs, Subnetting, Proxy Servers, etc."
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '17/10/2023'
tags: 'firewalls, vpn, subnetting, proxy servers'  
sources: [
    {
label: 'Google cybersecurity certificate',
    to: 'https://www.coursera.org/learn/networks-and-network-security?specialization=google-cybersecurity' 
}
]
---
## Firewalls and Network Security

A firewall is a network security device that monitors incoming and outgoing network traffic and decides whether to allow or block specific traffic based on a defined set of security rules. Firewalls have been a first line of defense in network security for over 25 years. They establish a barrier between secured and controlled internal networks that can be trusted and untrusted outside networks, such as the Internet.

### Different kinds of firewalls
- Hardware firewall: A hardware firewall is a physical device that is connected to your network. It is installed between your network and the incoming internet connection. A hardware firewall can protect every machine on a local network. It is also known as a network firewall.
- Software firewall: A software firewall is a program that is installed on a single computer and can protect that computer from incoming traffic. It is also known as a personal firewall.

### Types of Firewalls
- Packet-filtering firewalls: Packet-filtering firewalls work at the network level of the OSI model, or the IP layer of TCP/IP. They filter packets based on source and destination addresses and port numbers. They can also filter based on protocol type. Packet-filtering firewalls are susceptible to IP spoofing attacks.
- Stateful firewalls: Stateful firewalls keeps track of information passing through it and proactively filters out threats. They are more secure than packet-filtering firewalls.
- Stateless firewalls: Stateless firewalls do not keep track of information passing through it. They are less secure than stateful firewalls.
- Next Generation Firewalls: Next Generation Firewalls (NGFW) are firewalls that include additional functionality beyond packet inspection and stateful inspection. They include intrusion prevention, SSL and SSH inspection, deep packet inspection, and reputation-based malware filtering.


## Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)

A virtual private network, also known as a VPN, is a network security service that changes your public IP address and hides your virtual location so that you can keep your data private when you're using a public network like the internet

- VPNs encrypt your data as it travels through the internet to ensure confidentiality
- VPNs also perform Encapsulation.
- Encapsulation is the process of adding headers to data as it moves through the layers of the OSI model. The headers contain information that is used to route the data to its destination. When the data reaches the destination, the headers are removed. This hides your MAC address and IP address from the public network further enhancing security.


## Security Zones:

A security zone is a logical grouping of assets that have similar security requirements and are subject to the same policies and controls. Security zones are used to compartmentalize assets and restrict access to them. They are also used to help identify and mitigate threats. This is a part of security technique called network segmentation.

### Types of Security Zones

- Uncontrolled Zone: An uncontrolled zone is a zone that is not protected by a firewall. It is also known as a public zone. It is used to host publicly accessible resources such as web servers. It is also used to host resources that are not sensitive and do not require protection.
- Controlled Zone: A controlled zone is a zone that is protected by a firewall. It is also known as a private zone. It is used to host resources that are sensitive and require protection. It is also used to host resources that are not publicly accessible.
  - Demilitarized Zone (DMZ): A demilitarized zone (DMZ) is a controlled zone that is used to host publicly accessible resources such as web servers. It is also known as a perimeter network. It is a subnetwork that is located between an untrusted external network and a trusted internal network. It is used to provide an additional layer of security for an organization's local area network (LAN). It is also used to isolate publicly accessible resources from the internal network.
  - Intranet Zone: An intranet zone is a controlled zone that is used to host resources that are not publicly accessible. It is also known as a private network. It is a private network that is only accessible to an organization's employees. It is used to host resources that are sensitive and require protection.
  - Sensitive Zone: A sensitive zone is a controlled zone that is used to host resources that are highly sensitive are not accessible publicly and even others within the organization. It is also known as a restricted network. It is used to host resources that are highly sensitive and require the highest level of protection.

## Subnetting and CIDR

Subnetting is the process of dividing a network into smaller networks called subnets. It is used to improve network performance and security. It is also used to reduce the size of broadcast domains. 

['Subnet']('https://okdsmchimpofxigqckfu.supabase.co/storage/v1/object/public/assets/images/subnetting_cidr_kAy5jgW113xVT50.png')

Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) is a method for allocating subnet masks to IP addresses to create a subnet.
Classless addressing replaces classful addressing. Classful addressing was used in the 1980s as a system of grouping IP addresses into classes (Class A to Class E). Each class included a limited number of IP addresses, which were depleted as the number of devices connecting to the internet outgrew the classful range in the 1990s. Classless CIDR addressing expanded the number of available IPv4 addresses.
CIDR allows cybersecurity professionals to segment classful networks into smaller chunks. Eg 192.168.262.0/24 - This means all IP addresses from 192.168.262.0 to 192.168.262.255 are in the same subnet. This reduce the number of entries in the routing table and provides more available IP addresses within networks.

### Security benefits of subnetting

Subnetting allows network professionals and analysts to create a network within their own network without requesting another network IP address from their internet service provider. This process uses network bandwidth more efficiently and improves network performance. Subnetting is one component of creating isolated subnetworks through physical isolation, routing configuration, and firewalls.

## Proxy Server

A proxy server is a server that acts as an intermediary between a client and another server (such as a web server). It intercepts all requests to the real server to see if it can fulfill the requests itself. If not, it forwards the request to the real server.

### Types of Proxy Servers

- Forward Proxy Server: A forward proxy server is a proxy server that sits between a client and the internet. It intercepts all requests from the client and forwards them to the internet. It is used to hide the identity of the client from the internet. It is also used to bypass content filters and access blocked websites.
- Reverse Proxy Server: A reverse proxy server is a proxy server that sits between a client and a web server. It intercepts all requests from the client and forwards them to the web server. It is used to hide the identity of the web server from the client. It is also used to improve the performance of the web server by caching content.
- Email Proxy Server: An email proxy server is a proxy server that sits between a client and an email server. It intercepts all requests from the client and forwards them to the email server. It is used to hide the identity of the email server from the client. It is also used to filter spam and malware.
- 
