---
title: 'Navigate threats, risks, and vulnerabilities'
description: ''
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '27/09/2023'
tags: 'threats, nist rmf, risk, vulnerability'
sources: [
    {
label: 'Google Cybersecurity' ,
    to:  'https://www.coursera.org/learn/manage-security-risks?specialization=google-cybersecurity'
},
{
    label: 'ISC2 Certified in Cybersecurity',
    to: 'https://www.isc2.org/certifications/cc'
}
]
---
## Introduction

As a security professional, one of your many roles is to handle organization's digital and physical :cy-definition{src="/fundamental/asset" label="assets"}. Organizations face multiple security threats, risks, and vulnerabilities to their assets.

### Definitions

- A threat is any circumstance or event that can negatively impact assets. Example is social engineering attacks.
- Risk is anything that can impact confidentiality, integrity and availability of an asset. Risk is the likelihood of a threat occurring. Example, assuming there are no locks at on-premise data center, there will be the risk of adversely impacting confidentiality since anybody can walk in and have access to the servers/computers, integrity since anybody can enter the facility and modify any data they want, and availability since they can stole the computers which means the data won't be available when needed.
- Risks are different from threats.
- A vulnerability is a weakness that can be exploited by a threat.

Note: Vulnerability and threats must be present for there to be a risk.

## Key impacts of threats, risks, and vulnerabilities

1. Financial impact: When an organization's assets are compromised by an attack, such as the use of malware, the financial consequences can be significant for a variety of reasons. These can include interrupted production and services, the cost to correct the issue, and fines if assets are compromised because of non-compliance with laws and regulations
2. Identity theft: Organizations must decide whether to store private customer, employee, and outside vendor data, and for how long. Storing any type of sensitive data presents a risk to the organization
3. Reputation: A solid customer base supports an organization's mission, vision, and financial goals. An exploited vulnerability can lead customers to seek new business relationships with competitors or create bad press that causes permanent damage to an organization's reputation.

### Effects of the above impacts

 The loss of customer data doesn't only affect an organization's reputation and financials, it may also result in legal penalties and fines. Organizations are strongly encouraged to take proper security measures and follow certain protocols to prevent the significant impact of threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. By using all the tools in their toolkit, security teams are better prepared to handle an event such as a ransomware attack.

## Manage common threats, risks, and vulnerabilities

Understanding the current threat landscapes gives you the ability to help organizations create policies and processes designed to help prevent and mitigate these types of security issues.

### Risk Management

In order to properly manage risk, the following steps are required
    - Risk Identification: You have to know what risks are there before any mitigation strategies can be deduced and applied. Identifying risk is a shared responsibility of all employees/stakeholders.
    - Risk Assessment: It is the process of identifying, estimating and prioritizing identified risks to an organizations operations.
    - Risk treatment: Risk treatment refers to decisions on the best course of actions to handle risks. **Assume you are going on a trip to another city, you identify the risk of car accident and prioritized it highly**. The following are common risk treatment you can apply:
      - Risk Avoidance: Eliminating the risk entirely. In the above scenario, there is a risk of car accident. Choosing to stop going on the trip is avoiding the risk
      - Risk Acceptance: Taking no action to reduce the risk. Deciding to go on the trip even though you have identify the risk of a car accident means you have accepted the risk. Mostly organization's choose to accept risk when the risk impact or likelihood of occurring is negligible or when the benefits outweigh the risk.
      - Risk Transfer: Passing the risk to a third-party. You can go in for an insurance policy that will cover the risk of the car accident. In this case, you have transferred the risk to an insurance company. Usually, only part of the risk are transferred.
      - Risk Mitigation: Taking action to prevent or reduce the risk. In our scenario, following all road safety guidelines, best practices will significantly reduce the risk of a car accident.

Additionally, organizations implement risk management processes based on widely accepted frameworks to help protect digital and physical assets from various threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. Examples of frameworks commonly used in the cybersecurity industry include the National Institute of Standards and Technology Risk Management Framework [(NIST RMF)(https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/about-rmf)] and Health Information Trust Alliance [(HITRUST)(https://hitrustalliance.net/product-tool/hitrust-csf/?utm_term=&utm_campaign=HITRUST_i1_PaidSearch&utm_source=adwords&utm_medium=ppc&hsa_acc=2724012343&hsa_cam=16641331914&hsa_grp=136906352837&hsa_ad=598980848547&hsa_src=g&hsa_tgt=dsa-1659695676388&hsa_kw=&hsa_mt=&hsa_net=adwords&hsa_ver=3&gclid=Cj0KCQiAorKfBhC0ARIsAHDzsluRN5tSpCQal-rYnZLo2wUNppQdUHUba82LMX3JMGOoRPEJ6wG6-LgaAryYEALw_wcB)].

### Today’s most common threats, risks, and vulnerabilities

#### Threats

A threat is any circumstance or event that can negatively impact assets. As an entry-level security analyst, your job is to help defend the organization’s assets from inside and outside threats. Therefore, understanding common types of threats is important to an analyst’s daily work. As a reminder, common threats include:

- Insider threats: Staff members or vendors abuse their authorized access to obtain data that may harm an organization.
- Advanced persistent threats (APTs): A threat actor maintains unauthorized access to a system for an extended period of time.

#### Risks

A risk is anything that can impact the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of an asset. A basic formula for determining the level of risk is that risk equals the likelihood of a threat. One way to think about this is that a risk is being late to work and threats are traffic, an accident, a flat tire, etc.

There are different factors that can affect the likelihood of a risk to an organization’s assets, including:

- External risk: Anything outside the organization that has the potential to harm organizational assets, such as threat actors attempting to gain access to private information

- Internal risk: A current or former employee, vendor, or trusted partner who poses a security risk

- Legacy systems: Old systems that might not be accounted for or updated, but can still impact assets, such as workstations or old mainframe systems. For example, an organization might have an old vending machine that takes credit card payments or a workstation that is still connected to the legacy accounting system.

- Multiparty risk: Outsourcing work to third-party vendors can give them access to intellectual property, such as trade secrets, software designs, and inventions.

- Software compliance/licensing: Software that is not updated or in compliance, or patches that are not installed in a timely manner

#### Vulnerabilities

A vulnerability is a weakness that can be exploited by a threat. Therefore, organizations need to regularly inspect for vulnerabilities within their systems. Some vulnerabilities include:

- ProxyLogon: A pre-authenticated vulnerability that affects the Microsoft Exchange server. This means a threat actor can complete a user authentication process to deploy malicious code from a remote location.

- ZeroLogon: A vulnerability in Microsoft’s Netlogon authentication protocol. An authentication protocol is a way to verify a person's identity. Netlogon is a service that ensures a user’s identity before allowing access to a website's location.

- Log4Shell: Allows attackers to run Java code on someone else’s computer or leak sensitive information. It does this by enabling a remote attacker to take control of devices connected to the internet and run malicious code.

- PetitPotam: Affects Windows New Technology Local Area Network (LAN) Manager (NTLM). It is a theft technique that allows a LAN-based attacker to initiate an authentication request.

- Security logging and monitoring failures: Insufficient logging and monitoring capabilities that result in attackers exploiting vulnerabilities without the organization knowing it

- Server-side request forgery: Allows attackers to manipulate a server-side application into accessing and updating backend resources. It can also allow threat actors to steal data.

As an entry-level security analyst, you might work in vulnerability management, which is monitoring a system to identify and mitigate vulnerabilities. Although patches and updates may exist, if they are not applied, intrusions can still occur. For this reason, constant monitoring is important. The sooner an organization identifies a vulnerability and addresses it by patching it or updating their systems, the sooner it can be mitigated, reducing the organization’s exposure to the vulnerability.
