---
title: 'NIST Cybersecurity Frameworks'
description: ''
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '29/09/2023'
tags: 'nist csf, cybersecurity framework'
sources: [
    {
label: 'Google cybersecurity',
    to: 'https://www.coursera.org/learn/manage-security-risks?specialization=google-cybersecurity' 
    }
]
---
## Introduction

The NIST Cybersecurity Framework  (CSF) is a voluntary framework that consists of standards, guidelines, and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk. This framework is essential for any organization including for profit and non profit businesses, government agencies, etc.
The CSF consists of five important core functions, identify, protect, detect, respond, and recover.

## Core Functions of NIST CSF

**Scenario:** The scenario will further be developed with the explanation of the core functions below.
Imagine, getting to work in the morning with a coffee in hand feeling good about the day.

- Identify: This means you have to use the tools such as SIEM, packet analyzers to monitor the devices and systems on the internal network in the company. **scenario**: As a security analyst you are responsible for monitoring all devices and systems on the network to **identify** potential risk issues

- Protect: Develop strategies on how to protect the organization through the implementations of policies, procedures, training and tools that help mitigate risk
  
- Detect: To identify potential security incidents and improve monitoring capabilities to increase the speed and efficiency of detections. **scenario**: Imagine you are alerted by the SIEM tools you used in core 2('protect') of a high-risk incidence and that a workstation has been compromised
  
- Respond: Implementing proper procedures to contain, neutralize, and analyze security incidence and make improvements to the existing security policies
  **Scenario:** Following the alert, you find out an employee plugged an unauthorized usb into the workstation. You block the usb and isolate the workstation by removing it from the network. You investigate the incident to determine the source, who, why and what was infected. Make improvement.

- Recover: Returning affected systems back to normal operation.
  