# Professional Statement Outline

To develop a professional statement that briefly explains who you are and what you are
passionate about, follow the steps outlined.
Note: You will need a piece of paper or a blank word processing document to complete this
activity

## Step One

List two to three strengths that you currently have or are committed to developing

- programming
- analytical
- problem solving
- communication skills

## Step two

List one to two values you have

- Protecting organizations and its assets.
- Strict Compliance to laws and regulation.

## Step Three

Ask yourself some clarifying questions to determine what to include in your professional
statement:

1. What most interests me about the field of cybersecurity?
   Answer:
   - Investigating incidents
   - finding vulnerabilities, mitigating or finding solution to the vulnerability
   - educating others about cybersecurity
2. Who is the audience for my professional statement(e.g., cybersecurity recruiters,etc)?
   Answer:
   - Cybersecurity recruiters

3. In what ways can my strengths, values, and interests in cybersecurity support the security goals of various organizations.
   Answer:
   - Perform audits to ensure compliance
   - Effective communication skills to explain technical information to all stakeholders
   - Investigate incidence and mitigate incidence to minimize risk
   - Increase overall security posture by finding vulnerabilities and fixing them  before threat actors

### Final statement

I am a dedicated cybersecurity professional with strong analytical and communication skills. I enjoy identifying and analyzing potential risks, threats and vulnerabilities to ensure a strong security posture and compliance with laws and regulations.
