---
title: 'Conducting Security Audit  - Botium Toys'
description: 'An audit of a fictional company called Botium Toys '
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '29/09/2023'
tags: 'audit, nist csf, framework'
sources: [
    {
label: 'Google cybersecurity certificate: project activity 2',
    to:  'https://www.coursera.org/learn/manage-security-risks?specialization=google-cybersecurity'
}
]
---
## Scenario

Botium Toys is a small U.S. business that develops and sells toys. The business has a single physical location, which serves as their main office, a storefront, and warehouse for their products. However, Botium Toy’s online presence has grown, attracting customers in the U.S. and abroad. As a result, their information technology (IT) department is under increasing pressure to support their online market worldwide.

The manager of the IT department has decided that an internal IT audit needs to be conducted. She expresses concerns about not having a solidified plan of action to ensure business continuity and compliance, as the business grows. She believes an internal audit can help better secure the company’s infrastructure and help them identify and mitigate potential risks, threats, or vulnerabilities to critical assets. The manager is also interested in ensuring that they comply with regulations related to internally processing and accepting online payments and conducting business in the European Union (E.U.).

The IT manager starts by implementing the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework (NIST CSF), establishing an audit scope and goals, listing assets currently managed by the IT department, and completing a risk assessment. The goal of the audit is to provide an overview of the risks and/or fines that the company might experience due to the current state of their security posture.

Your task is to review the IT manager’s scope, goals, and risk assessment report. Then, perform an internal audit by completing a controls and compliance checklist.

### Supporting Materials

- Botium Toys: Scope, goals, and risk assessment report
- Control categories

**Note**: The above supporting materials were provided to complete the auditing.

## Security Audit

### Scope and goals of the audit

**Scope**: The scope is defined as the entire security program at Botium Toys. This means
all assets need to be assessed alongside internal processes and procedures related to
the implementation of controls and compliance best practices.

**Goals**: Assess existing assets and complete the controls and compliance checklist to
determine which controls and compliance best practices need to be implemented to
improve Botium Toys’ security posture.

### Assets

Assets managed by the IT Department include:

- On-premises equipment for in-office business needs  
- Employee equipment: end-user devices (desktops/laptops, smartphones), remote workstations, headsets, cables, keyboards, mice, docking stations, surveillance cameras, etc.
- Storefront products available for retail sale on site and online; stored in the company’s adjoining warehouse
- Management of systems, software, and services: accounting, telecommunication, database, security, e-commerce, and inventory management
- Internet access
- Internal network
- Data retention and storage
Legacy system maintenance: end-of-life systems that require human monitoring

### Risk Assessment

#### Risk description

Currently, there is inadequate management of assets. Additionally, Botium Toys does not have all of the proper controls in place and may not be fully compliant with U.S. and international regulations and standards.

#### Control best practices

The first of the five functions of the NIST CSF is Identify. Botium Toys will need to dedicate resources to identify assets so they can appropriately manage them. Additionally, they will need to classify existing assets and determine the impact of the loss of existing assets, including systems, on business continuity.

#### Risk score

On a scale of 1 to 10, the risk score is 8, which is fairly high. This is due to a lack of controls and adherence to compliance best practices.

### Additional comments

The potential impact from the loss of an asset is rated as medium, because the IT department does not know which assets would be at risk. The risk to assets or fines from governing bodies is high because Botium Toys does not have all of the necessary controls in place and is not fully adhering to best practices related to compliance regulations that keep critical data private/secure. Review the following bullet points for specific details:

- Currently, all Botium Toys employees have access to internally stored data and may be able to access cardholder data and customers’ PII/SPII.
- Encryption is not currently used to ensure confidentiality of customers’ credit card information that is accepted, processed, transmitted, and stored locally in the company’s internal database.
- Access controls pertaining to least privilege and separation of duties have not been implemented.
- The IT department has ensured availability and integrated controls to ensure data integrity.
- The IT department has a firewall that blocks traffic based on an appropriately defined set of security rules.
- Antivirus software is installed and monitored regularly by the IT department.
- The IT department has not installed an intrusion detection system (IDS).
- There are no disaster recovery plans currently in place, and the company does not have backups of critical data.
- The IT department has established a plan to notify E.U. customers within 72 hours if there is a security breach. Additionally, privacy policies, procedures, and processes have been developed and are enforced among IT department members/other employees, to properly document and maintain data.
- Although a password policy exists, its requirements are nominal and not in line with current minimum password complexity requirements (e.g., at least eight characters, a combination of letters and at least one number; special characters).
- There is no centralized password management system that enforces the password policy’s minimum requirements, which sometimes affects productivity when employees/vendors submit a ticket to the IT department to recover or reset a password.
- While legacy systems are monitored and maintained, there is no regular schedule in place for these tasks and intervention methods are unclear.
- The store’s physical location, which includes Botium Toys’ main offices, store front, and warehouse of products, has sufficient locks, up-to-date closed-circuit television (CCTV) surveillance, as well as functioning fire detection and prevention systems.

#### Control Assessment Checklist

| Control | Implementation (yes/no)  | Explanation |
|--|--|-- |
|Least Privilege  | No  | All employees have access to customer data. Privileges needs to be limited to reduce risk of a breach or insider threats.|
|Disaster recovery plans |NO | There are no disaster recovery plans in place.
|Password policies | No| Password policy is not up to standard. Threat actors can use brute force or  rainbow table attacks to easily crack the password and compromise assets
|Separation of duties | No| In order to prevent fraud this control needs to be implemented immediately
| Access Control Policies | No| All employees have access to PII/SPII of clients which pose a risk to the confidentiality and integrity  of data.
|Firewall | Yes | There exist a firewall that blocks all traffic based on an appropriately defined set of rules
|Intrusion Detection System(IDS) |No | The IT department needs an IDS in place to help detect possible intrusion attempts
|Backups | No | The IT department needs backup of critical data, to ensure business continuity in the event of attacks such as ransomware or accidents such as fire outbreak
|Antivirus software | Yes| The IT department has installed antivirus software and has been monitoring it regularly
|Manual monitoring, maintenance, and intervention for legacy systems | No |The list of assets notes the use of legacy systems. The risk assessment indicates that these systems are monitored and maintained, but there is not a regular schedule in place for this task and procedures/ policies related to intervention are unclear, which could place these systems at risk of a breach.
|Encryption | No | This is a huge risk to the confidentiality of data and a breach of PCI DSS since customers financial information are not encrypted.
|Password management | No| There are no password management in place: implementing this control will boost employee productivity and prevent/reduce password issues
|Closed-circuit television(CCTV) |yes | A functional CCTV is installed at the company's physical location
|Locks | yes| The company's physical location has sufficient locks implemented
|Fire detection |yes | Functional fire detection and prevention system is installed at the company's physical location

#### Compliance Checklist

##### Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)


| Implement data encryption procedures to better secure credit card transaction touchpoints and data. | No |The company does not currently use encryption to better ensure the confidentiality of customers’ financial information
|Only authorized users have access to customers’ credit card information | No | All employees currently have access to the company's internal data
|Credit card information is accepted, processed, transmitted, and stored internally, in a secure environment. | No | Credit card information is not encrypted and all employees have access to internal data, including customers' credit card information
| Adopt secure password management policies| No | Password policies are nominal and no password management system is currently in place

##### General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)

| Best Practices| Implementation (yes/no)  | Explanation |
|--|--|-- |
E.U customers'data is kept private and secure | No | The company fails to encrypt customers' financial data
In the event of data breach, there is a plan to notify E.U. customers. | yes| There is a plan to notify E.U. customers within 72 hours of a data breach
|Ensure data is properly classified | No | Current assets have been inventored but not classified
| Enforce privacy policies, procedures, and processes to properly document and maintain data | yes | Privacy policies, procedures, and processes have been developed and enforced among IT team members and other employees, as required.

### Recommendation
