---
title: 'Frameworks and Controls'
description: ''
image: ''
author: 'Andrews Boateng Okyere'
publishedAt: '25/09/2023'
tags: 'frameworks, security controls'
sources: [
    {
label: 'Foundation of Cybersecurity',
    to: 'https://www.coursera.org/learn/foundations-of-cybersecurity?specialization=google-cybersecurity'
}
]
---


## Security Frameworks

Security frameworks are guidelines used for implementing security controls to help mitigate risk and threat to data and privacy. Security frameworks provides structured method to implement **security lifecycle**.
The purpose of security frameworks includes

- Protecting :cy-definition{src="/abbreviations/PII" label="PII"}.
- Securing financial information
- Identifying security weaknesses
- Managing organization risk and
- Ensuring Compliance with laws and regulations

### Frameworks Components

Frameworks have four main components and they are

1. Identifying and documenting security goals. Assuming a company has the goal of complying to E.U's GDPR, a security analysts may be tasked to identify and document areas where the company is out of compliance with the GDPR.
2. Setting guidelines to achieve security goals. Using the example above, the organization/company may need to establish new policies or reform old policies for how clients data are handled.
3. Implementing strong security process. A security analysts of a social media company may help design procedures to ensure the organization complies with verified user data requests.
4. Monitoring and communicating results. An example will be to monitor your companies internal network and report potential security issues affecting GDPR to your manager or regulatory compliance officer.

## Security Controls

Security controls pertain to the physical, logical and administrative mechanisms that act as safeguards or countermeasures prescribed for an information system to protect CIA of the system and its information. They are safeguards designed to reduce specific risk.
Security frameworks and controls are vital to managing security of all types of organization's security goals and protect the people it serves.
